CFKA and Rabbit MQ aren't
interchangeable. They solve different
problems, and picking the wrong one can
mean significant rework later. Now, both
exist to solve the same fundamental
challenge, though. When one service
needs to talk to another, the simplest
option is a direct call. Your order
service makes an HTTP request to your
inventory service, waits for response,
and moves on. This works great until
that inventory service is slow or down
or getting hammered with traffic.
Suddenly your orbit service is just
stuck waiting, timing out or dropping
requests on the floor because it has
nowhere to put them. Message cues like
CFKA and Rabbit MQ solve this because
they add a buffer between your services.
Instead of calling the inventory service
directly, your order service drops a
message into a queue and then just
returns immediately. The inventory
service can then pick up that message
whenever it's ready and process it. If
the inventory service is slow, messages
accumulate in the queue. If you get a
massive spike in orders during a flash
sale, for example, the queue absorbs all
of that traffic and then lets your
downstream services process it at
whatever pace it can handle. CFKA and
RabbitMQ both give you this decoupling.
Producers, consumers with a broker or
message queue in the middle, but how
they actually work under the hood is
fundamentally different. And that's what
needs to end up driving your decision-m
when you're deciding which of the two to
use in your project. Starting with
Rabbit MQ. Rabbit MQ is a traditional
message broker and it follows a mental
model that most developers find pretty
intuitive if you've ever used a Q-ike
data structure. A producer sends a
message to a broker. The broker looks at
some routing rules you've configured to
figure out which Q that message belongs
to and then a consumer pulls the
messages off of that Q. Once the
consumer acknowledges successful
processing, Rabbit MQ deletes the
message. The broker handles a lot for
you. It routes messages to the right
cues, tracks which messages have been
delivered, and then it retries any
failed deliveries. When a message fails
repeatedly, RabbitMQ moves it to a dead
letter Q automatically so that you can
debug it later. As the engineer, you
configure these rules and then the
broker enforces them. CFKA doesn't have
all of this built in. If you need devlet
handling in CFKA, you end up building it
yourself. Now, from the perspective of
the consumer, this is simple. You
connect or subscribe to a cube. Messages
show up. You process them and you send
back an acknowledgement. All of the
complexity of figuring out where
messages came from, where they need to
go, that's the broker's problem, not the
consumers. This model maps really well
to task oriented workloads. Sending
emails, processing payments, resizing
messages. You've got a unit of work that
needs to happen. You drop it into a
queue, something picks it up and does
it. As we alluded to, CFKA works a
little differently. Instead of being a
message broker that routes messages to
cues and deletes them when they're
consumed, CFKA is essentially a
distributed appendon log. When a
producer sends a message, CFKA appends
it to a topic. That message doesn't
disappear when someone reads it. It just
sits there in the log. And depending on
how you've configured your retention, it
may stay there for hours, days, weeks,
or even indefinitely.
Consumers then read from this log, but
they're responsible for tracking their
own position. CFKA calls this position
an offset. So when your consumer reads a
message number 500, your consumer then
remembers that it's at position 500. If
your consumer crashes or restarts, it
looks up where it left off and it picks
up from there. And if you need to reread
a message from an hour ago, you just
rewind that offset. Totally possible.
That changes the model. Rabbit MQ is a
smart broker with simple consumers. It
handles routing, tracks deliveries,
manages retries. CFKA is a simple broker
with smart consumers. It stores messages
in order. Consumers decide what to read
and when. CFKA does track consumer group
offsets, but the consumer drives the
logic. Still, the benefit is that
messages become durable and replayable
in CFKA. So, multiple consumer groups
can read the same stream independently.
Your analytics team can process the same
events as your real-time notification
system. A new service that comes online
6 months from now can read the entire
history from day one and do whatever
backfill it needs to do. So let's
emphasize that distinction again. Rabbit
MQ is a message broker. Messages just
flow through it. CFKA is a log. Messages
live in it. In Rabbit MQ, once a message
is consumed, it's gone. In CFKA,
messages persist and any number of
consumers can read them at any time from
any point in history. This one
difference drives almost every other
trade-off because they solve different
problems. Many teams end up actually
using both CFKA as their durable event
stream that multiple systems read from.
Rabbit MQ as the task Q that processes
the work that those events trigger. Now
that you understand the basic models,
here are the specific technical
differences that should drive your
decision. Starting with ordering
guarantees, both systems preserve order,
but differently. Rabbit MQs are strictly
ordered, meaning messages come out in
the order that they went in. So if you
had just a single consumer, then you are
guaranteed perfect ordering. But with
multiple consumers pulling from the
queue at the same time, they each
process in parallel. So you could trade
off that ordering for throughput. CFKA
on the other hand splits each topic into
partitions. So order is guaranteed only
within a partition, but not across
partitions. You control which partition
a message goes to by its partition key.
All orders for consumer 1 2 3 4 5 go to
the same partition and get processed in
order. Customer 67890's orders may go to
a different partition. So each
consumer's orders stay in sequence, but
there is no global ordering. The
trade-off is that Rabbit MQ gives you
global ordering with a single consumer.
CFKA gives you per entity ordering with
parallelism. Pick based on which one you
need. This decision then has a
consequence on throughput and latency.
Rabbit MQ handles about 4,000 to 10,000
messages per second. Of course, this is
dependent on message size and hardware,
but the latency sits at around 1 to 5
milliseconds for low volume workloads.
That's because the broker pushes
messages to consumers automatically. But
the broker is also doing a lot of work.
Tracking delivery state, managing
acknowledgements, handling routing
decisions. All of that per message
overhead ends up adding up. And as it
increases, throughput decreases.
CFKA handles over a million messages per
second, roughly a 100 times more.
Latency is higher at baseline, typically
5 to 50 milliseconds, because consumers
pull messages in batches rather than
receiving them immediately. The broker
does far less work per message. It
appends to a sequential log and then
lets consumers track their own position.
And so under heavy load, that simplicity
really pays off. All that it needs to do
is append to a log and thus latency can
stay consistent even as the volume
grows. What about delivery guarantees
which is a really really important topic
when it comes to message cues. What
happens when a consumer fails to process
a message? You have two options. You
could lose that message or you could
deliver it again to another consumer and
risk duplicating the work. At most once
delivery means that you might lose
messages. The broker sends once and it
doesn't retry. This is really fast. But
if something goes wrong, the message is
gone forever. At least once means that
you might get duplicates. The broker
will just retry until it gets an
acknowledgement from a consumer. This
way you get no data loss, but your
consumers could end up seeing that
message twice and thus processing it
twice. Both Rabbit MQ and CFKA support
at least once, which is what most
applications need and is the industry
standard. CFKA does also support exactly
once, which is the holy grail, where
each message is passed and processed
exactly one time, but it's much more
limited than it sounds. So be cautious
if anybody recommends this. It only
works when both input and output are
CFKA topics within the exact same CFKA
cluster under CFKA transactions. So the
moment you need to write to a database,
call an external API, or cross cluster
boundaries, you're back to at least
once. In practice, most applications
still need item potent consumers. So
don't end up picking CFKA just because
you heard it supports exactly once. The
reality is it's a lot more nuanced than
that. And for your use case, it probably
doesn't. Rabbit MQ is much simpler to
run. It's a single binary. It's
straightforward clustering. It has
built-in management UI. So if you're a
small team running just few cues, it's
really approachable. Kafka is of course
harder. Historically, you needed
Zookeeper as a separate coordination
service. Newer versions don't use that.
They use raft which eliminates the need
for Zookeeper. But you still need to
manage partition rebalancing, broker
failures, topic configurations, and
consumer group coordination. So there's
a lot more to learn and a lot more that
can go wrong. Managed services change
this calculus. Of course, you have
Confluent Cloud, Amazon MSK, and Azure
Event Hubs, which handle most of that
CFKA complexity for you. So if you're
choosing CFKA, strongly consider a
managed service unless you have
dedicated infrastructure expertise
already within the team. So to wrap up
here, when should you use each? You'll
want Revit MQ if you need task cues and
background jobs like sending emails,
processing payments, resizing images,
the work goes in, it gets done, and the
message disappears. If you want smart
routing, like the broker decides which
worker gets which message based on
content. If you want low latency at
moderate scale, so sub 5 millisecond
delivery when you're not pushing
millions of messages, and you want
simple operations, it's easier to set up
and it's easier to reason about.
Instagram actually uses Rabbit MQ to
process photo uploads. When you post a
picture, resizing and filtering happens
via background workers, which are pulled
off of Rabbit MQs. Reddit, as I
understand it, also uses it to build
comment threads and calculate karma
scores. So these are classic task Q
patterns. On the other hand, you'll want
CFKA if you need multiple systems
reading the same events, analytics,
fraud detection, billing and audit
logging, all consuming one stream
independently. If you need replay
capabilities, reprocessing historical
data to debug issues or rebuild state.
If you have massive scale, millions of
events per second with consistent
latency requirements. And if you need a
durable event history, so a permanent
record of everything that ever happened.
Netflix processes pabytes of data daily
through CFKA for recommendations and
billing. Uber uses it for real-time
pricing and fraud detection across
millions of rides. And then LinkedIn
invented CFKA and still uses it to power
their feed and messaging. So these
systems need every event stored. They
need to be replayable and are consumed
by dozens of different services. So if
you have a well- definfined constrained
use case that fits the Rabbit MQ model,
like a task Q or background jobs, go
with Rabbit MQ for its simplicity. For
everything else, you may need to lean
towards CFKA and consider whether or not
you want to host your own or just use a
managed service. Or of course, you can
use both. CFKA is the event backbone.
Rabbit MQ for the background jobs that
those events trigger.